Once you install Linux, you get three editors, Vi, Vim and gedit. Vim and Vi work in exactly similar fashion. gedit works same as that of notpad under windows. 
VI is a text editor and the most popular in the Linux world. The reasons for its popularity are
1) availability for almost all Linux distros.
2) VI works the same throughout multiple platforms, and 
3) its user-friendly features.

Currently, VI Improved or VIM is the most used advanced counterpart of VI.

To work on the VI text editor, you have to know how to use the VI editor in Linux.  

VI text editor works in two modes::
1) Command mode and 
2) Insert mode. 

Command mode :: users commands are taken to take action on a file.
                The VI editor, usually, starts in the command mode. 
                Here, the words typed act as commands.
Hence, one should be in the command mode while passing a command.

Insert mode :: file editing is done in this mode. 
               Here, the text is inserted into the file. 
               So, you need to be in the insert mode to enter text. 
               Just type ‘i’ to be in the insert mode. 

Use the Esc key to switch from insert mode to command mode in the editor. 
If you don’t know your current mode, press the Esc key twice. This takes you to the command mode.

Launch VI Text Editor 
To launch the editor, open your Linux terminal and then type:
vi <filename_NEW> or <filename_EXISTING>
 

VI Editing Commands
You need to be in the command mode to run editing commands in the VI editor. VI is case-sensitive. Hence, make sure you use the commands in the correct letter case.
Also, make sure you type the right command to avoid undesired changes. Below are some of the essential commands to use in VI.

i – Inserts at cursor (gets into the insert mode)

a – Writes after the cursor (gets into the insert mode)

A – Writes at the ending of a line (gets into the insert mode)

o – Opens a new line (gets into the insert mode)

ESC – Terminates the insert mode

u – Undo the last change

U – Undo all changes of the entire line

D – Deletes the content of a line after the cursor

R – Overwrites characters from the cursor onwards

r – Replaces a character

s – Substitutes one character under the cursor and continue to insert

S – Substitutes a full line and start inserting at the beginning of a line

~ – Changes a character’s case

dd – Deletes the line

3dd – Deletes 3 lines

dw – Deletes a word

4dw – Deletes 4 words

x – Deletes a character at the cursor

cw – Changes the word

Commands for Moving within a File
For moving within a file, you should be in the command mode. Also, arrow keys can be used to navigate. Below are the commands used to navigate within a file.

k – Moves cursor up

j – Moves cursor down

l – Moves cursor right

h – Moves cursor left


Commands for Saving and Closing a File
To exit the text editor and save the changes to a file, you need to be in the command mode. Below are the commands to use for saving and closing a file in the editor.

Shift+zz – Saves a file and exits

:w – Saves a file and keeps the file open

:q – Exits without saving

:wq – Saves a file and quits
